feat(ai-gateway): Migrate AI MCP Oauth2 plugin overview (#5792)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_ai_gateway_policies/ai-mcp-oauth2/index.md

---
title: 'AI MCP OAuth2'
name: 'AI MCP OAuth2'

content_type: policy
publisher: kong-inc
description: 'Secure MCP server access with OAuth2 authentication'

tech_preview: true
products:
    - ai-gateway

works_on:
    - konnect

min_version:
    ai-gateway: '2.0'

tags:
  - ai
  - mcp
  - security

search_aliases:
  - ai-mcp-oauth2
  - OAuth2
  - MCP

icon: ai-mcp-oauth2.png

categories:
   - ai
related_resources:
  - text: OAuth 2.0 specification for MCP
    url: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/authorization
  - text: AI MCP Server
    url: /ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/
  - text: AI Policy
    url: /ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/
---

> The AI MCP OAuth2 Policy secures Model Context Protocol (MCP) traffic on {{site.ai_gateway}} using [OAuth 2.0 specification for MCP servers](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/authorization). It ensures only authorized MCP clients can access protected MCP servers proxied via an [AI MCP Server](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/) entity, and acts as a crucial security layer for MCP traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AI MCP OAuth2 Policy secures Model Context Protocol (MCP) traffic on {{site.ai_gateway}} using the [OAuth 2.0 specification for MCP servers](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/authorization). It ensures only authorized MCP clients can access protected MCP servers proxied via an [AI MCP Server](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/) entity, and acts as a crucial security layer for MCP traffic.
```

## Purpose and core functionality

The AI MCP OAuth2 Policy provides OAuth 2.0 authentication for MCP traffic, allowing MCP clients to safely request access. It validates that access tokens are issued specifically for the target MCP server, ensuring only authorized requests are accepted. To reduce the risk of token theft or confused deputy attacks, the Policy does not pass access tokens to upstream services.

The Policy performs three core functions:

> * Validates incoming MCP requests by verifying access tokens from an external Authorization Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Validates incoming MCP requests by verifying access tokens from an external authorization server.
```

    participant AS as Authorization server
    participant U as Upstream MCP server

    C->>K: Discover protected resource metadata
    activate K
    K-->>C: Protected resource metadata (includes auth server address)
    deactivate K

    C->>AS: Request access token
    activate AS
    AS-->>C: Access token
    deactivate AS

    C->>K: MCP auth request
    activate K
    K->>AS: Introspect token
    activate AS
    AS-->>K: Valid / invalid
    deactivate AS

    alt If token valid
        K->>U: Forward request with claims as headers
        activate U
        U-->>K: MCP server response
        deactivate U
        K-->>C: MCP response
    else If token invalid
        K-->>C: 401 Unauthorized
    end
    deactivate K

{% endmermaid %}
<!-- vale on -->

## Policy execution

The AI MCP OAuth2 Policy is designed to secure MCP traffic as early as possible in the request lifecycle to prevent unauthorized access before any AI-specific processing occurs.

{:.warning}
> **Note:** The AI MCP OAuth2 Policy is not invoked as part of an LLM request flow.
>
> Instead, it targets API traffic (MCP traffic specifically), allowing it to capture MCP requests independently of LLM request flow.

> > LLM-specific policies will not be applied to MCP traffic. Use this Policy with API-traffic policies like Rate Limiting Advanced, and other API-level policies as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> LLM-specific policies will not be applied to MCP traffic. Use this Policy with API-traffic policies like [AI Rate Limiting Advanced](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-rate-limiting-advanced/reference/), and other API-level policies as needed.
```

## Token validation methods

The Policy supports two token validation methods. When introspection is configured, it is always used. JWKS is only used when no introspection endpoint is configured.

* **Introspection**: Set [`config.introspection_endpoint`](./reference/#schema--config-introspection-endpoint) to have the Policy call the authorization server to validate opaque tokens. Requires `config.client_id` when `config.client_auth` is `client_secret_basic` or `client_secret_post`.

> * **JWKS**: Set [`config.jwks_endpoint`](./reference/#schema--config-jwks-endpoint) to validate signed JWTs locally using the authorization server's public keys. If not set, the Policy attempts to discover the JWKS URI from the authorization server metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **JWKS**: Set [`config.jwks_endpoint`](./reference/#schema--config-jwks-endpoint) to validate signed JWTs locally using the authorization server's public keys. If this isn't set, the Policy attempts to discover the JWKS URI from the authorization server metadata.
```

formats:
  - konnect-api
{% endentity_example %}

### AI Consumer Groups

You can also map token claims to AI Consumer Groups to enforce team or organization-level rate limiting and access policies. For example, map users from your authorization server's `teams` or `organizations` claims to AI Consumer Groups, then apply policies at the group level across multiple MCP clients.

Configure AI Consumer Group lookup:

* Set [`config.consumer_groups_claim`](./reference/#schema--config-consumer-groups-claim) to the path of the claim containing the AI Consumer Group names. Supports nested paths with multiple strings.
* Set [`config.consumer_groups_optional`](./reference/#schema--config-consumer-groups-optional) to `true` to allow requests to proceed if no matching AI Consumer Group is found.

{% entity_example %}
type: policy
data:
  name: oauth2-with-teams
  display_name: OAuth2 with Team Mapping
  type: ai-mcp-oauth2
  config:
    resource: https://api.example.com/mcp
    authorization_servers:
      - https://auth.example.com
    consumer_groups_claim:
      - groups
    consumer_groups_optional: true
formats:
  - konnect-api
{% endentity_example %}

### Virtual credentials

> When consumer mapping is not used, set [`config.credential_claim`](./reference/#schema--config-credential-claim) to derive a virtual credential from the token. This credential is used by other policies to track usage. Defaults to `["sub"]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When AI Consumer mapping isn't used, set [`config.credential_claim`](./reference/#schema--config-credential-claim) to derive a virtual credential from the token. This credential is used by other policies to track usage. Defaults to `["sub"]`.
```

## Token exchange

Token exchange lets the Policy swap the client's access token for a different token before forwarding the request to the upstream MCP server. This is useful when the upstream MCP server requires a token from a different authorization server or with different scopes.

{:.info}
> Token exchange requires [`config.passthrough_credentials`](./reference/#schema--config-passthrough-credentials) to be set to `true`.

> When `config.token_exchange.enabled` is `true`, the Policy performs the following after validating the incoming token:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When [`config.token_exchange.enabled`](./reference/#schema--config-token-exchange) is `true`, the Policy performs the following after validating the incoming token:
```

    activate U
    U-->>K: MCP server response
    deactivate U
    K-->>C: MCP response
    deactivate K
{% endmermaid %}
<!-- vale on -->

Configure token exchange:

* Set [`config.token_exchange.enabled`](./reference/#schema--config-token-exchange) to `true` and set [`config.token_exchange.token_endpoint`](./reference/#schema--config-token-exchange-token-endpoint) to the token exchange endpoint URL.
* Set [`config.token_exchange.client_auth`](./reference/#schema--config-token-exchange-client-auth) to control authentication with the token exchange endpoint. Accepted values: `client_secret_basic`, `client_secret_post`, `none`, `inherit`. Use `inherit` to reuse credentials from the introspection endpoint.
* Set [`config.token_exchange.request.actor_token_source`](./reference/#schema--config-token-exchange-request) to `header` (also set `config.token_exchange.request.actor_token_header`) or `config` (also set `config.token_exchange.request.actor_token`).
* Exchanged tokens are cached by default. Set [`config.token_exchange.cache.enabled`](./reference/#schema--config-token-exchange-cache) to `false` to disable caching. TTL defaults to `3600` seconds.

> 
> The following example creates an AI MCP OAuth2 Policy that validates client tokens with one authorization server and exchanges them for tokens from a token exchange endpoint before forwarding to the upstream MCP server:
> 
> {% entity_example %}
> type: policy
> data:
>   name: mcp-oauth2-token-exchange
>   display_name: MCP OAuth2 Token Exchange
>   type: ai-mcp-oauth2
>   config:
>     passthrough_credentials: true
>     authorization_servers:
>       - https://auth.example.com
>     consumer_claim:
>       - sub
>     consumer_by:
>       - username
>       - custom_id
>     consumer_optional: false
>     token_exchange:
>       enabled: true
>       token_endpoint: https://auth.example.com/oauth/token
>       client_auth: client_secret_basic
>       request:
>         actor_token_source: header
>         actor_token_header: X-Actor-Token
>       cache:
>         enabled: true
>         ttl: 3600
> formats:
>   - konnect-api
> {% endentity_example %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% entity_example %}
type: policy
data:
  name: mcp-oauth2-token-exchange
  display_name: MCP OAuth2 Token Exchange
  type: ai-mcp-oauth2
  config:
    resource: https://your-resource-server.example.com
    passthrough_credentials: true
    authorization_servers:
      - https://auth.example.com
    consumer_claim:
      - sub
    consumer_by:
      - username
      - custom_id
    consumer_optional: false
    token_exchange:
      enabled: true
      token_endpoint: https://auth.example.com/oauth/token
      client_auth: client_secret_basic
      client_id: your-client-id
      client_secret: your-client-secret
      request:
        actor_token_source: header
        actor_token_header: X-Actor-Token
      cache:
        enabled: true
        ttl: 3600
formats:
  - konnect-api
{% endentity_example %}
```
The original one gave me this error:

"detail":"Bad Request: config.resource: required field missing, config.token_exchange.@entity[0]: failed conditional validation given value of field 'client_auth', config.token_exchange.@entity[1]: failed conditional validation given value of field 'client_auth', config.token_exchange.client_id: required field missing, config.token_exchange.client_secret: required field missing","invalid_parameters":[{"field":"config.resource","reason":"required field missing","source":"body"},{"field":"config.token_exchange.@entity[0]","reason":"failed conditional validation given value of field 'client_auth'","source":"body"},{"field":"config.token_exchange.@entity[1]","reason":"failed conditional validation given value of field 'client_auth'","source":"body"},{"field":"config.token_exchange.client_id","reason":"required field missing","source":"body"},{"field":"config.token_exchange.client_secret","reason":"required field missing","source":"body"}]

Claude helped with the fix, please double check the fields to make sure that it's correct and Claude didn't change it to a different example.
